---
title: Little Big Internet
date: 2022-12-14T18:39:31-06:00
draft: false
description: Scaling down our personal internet
---
> *It's ultimately up to us, the people who use the internet, to determine its future. Many of us are now seeking change, and some are starting to experiment with what the internet could look like. By downsizing and focusing on creating a more personal and human experience, we can create smaller, more intimate groups and networks which we own and control and where we can prioritize our own values and needs - a Little Big Internet.*

The internet is a space where 4.6 billion (about 60% of the population) people and counting[^1] can near-instantaneously access the sum of each other's thoughts, emotions, knowledge, ideas, and expressions. It's unmatched in its creative, unifying potential, but the internet has also shown a destructive side, with shades of gray in between. The world wide web as we know it is a proverbial Pandora's Box, but despite its tremendous, unprecedented impact on society, culture, and politics, *people* are the ones operating the internet and sustaining it. We're the ones who, one way or another, choose to use the net and it is ultimately up to us to collectively decide what happens with it. In line with that, many people now seek change, and some of those folks are starting to imagine and experiment with what this network could look like.

I started my foray into free, open-source software (FOSS, or sometimes FLOSS) when I first signed up for a Mastodon account in 2020. According to the Free Software Foundation, free software seeks to respect the freedom of users to use, modify, share, and study software.[^2] In that respect, free and open-source software creates equity between the programmer and the user - there is less that the software developer can know or do that the user can't also know or do. While it isn't a 1:1 comparison, I've thought about software freedom and user rights in the context of our internet, and I wondered how we might go about equalizing the relations we have in a cyberspace dominated by giants and better navigating this overwhelming virtual space. As I've delved deeper into this side of software, I myself have developed a new philosophy on how I should strive to communicate using the internet.

## The Little Big Internet
For me, it's time to find my Little Big Internet, or LBI. The internet we know is already big, and it doesn't show any signs of shrinking any time soon - in fact, by 2025, we will generate an estimated 463 exabytes of data daily.[^3] But, regardless of what internet you want to envision, the ability to instantly communicate with a person on a different hemisphere, provided you have the desire to, is what makes the internet truly feel *big*. We aren't properly configured, however, to constantly keep all the world's people in our hearts and minds. Like the 24-hour news cycle, the internet, especially social media, bombards us with more information than we have the capability to fully digest, process, understand, analyze, extrapolate from, or even retain. Not only can it become overwhelming for some, but it also comes with its own deceptions and manipulations. It makes sense that we would want to downsize and restrain the number of people we connect with online. This is where, I feel, we have to become *little*.

I use the phrase "become little" to mean a "scaling down" of our current internet. Our usage is already "scaled down" in the sense that we only engage with a certain number of people online, but most of our engagement still takes place in huge "containers" which we do not own. We are alienated from control over most social media. Much of the power to curate our interactions, decide what deserves our attention, or share (or withhold) our information doesn't belong to us and often finds its way to the highest bidder's hands. Governments, corporations, and other stakeholders contest this power to sell products or ideas to us - openly or covertly - and, in some parcel, reserve the right to decide what does or doesn't have a platform because they own and operate its infrastructure. Part of this "scaling down" is restoring more of that power to our hands, and another part of that is making the internet more personal and human.

## Starting with a "why"
I don't have to do anything overnight, and I don't need to have everything planned to the last detail right away. Yet, I do need to start somewhere and begin chipping away at the hold which larger entities have over myself, my data, and my expression. My "why," my reason for creating my LBI, is the origin where I anchor my personal concept of LBI. Though inseparable from and rooted in other people's ideas, my concept emerges from my own values. Because I value an affirming and accountable community, a reverence for learning and creativity, and a critical consciousness, I want to prioritize those in my pocket of the internet. I'm building an LBI for myself because I want to experience community with other tech geeks, writers, and organizers, to share creative work and collaborate, and to have a constructive space for navigating the world's complexity.

### Social media could serve us better
I believe that much of traditional social media (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, Twitter) predates on our mind's attention and reward mechanisms, intentionally or otherwise. Recently, they've developed algorithms which serve you content you're likely to find interesting or engaging, in lieu of showing content in chronological order. This can be a positive experience, for example when you're bored and find yourself needing entertainment or inspiration; however, it also underpins system which doses users with provocative or addictive content.[^4] Algorithms like this, employed beside "dark patterns,"[^5] can make users more suggestible and cause them to scroll for hours and consume more ads or subtle propaganda. In that respect, it makes the internet much like a super-highway, where you can drive hypnotized by the road for hours without even stopping to consider the world around you.

Because of the wealth of emotionally charged content, that mechanism has turned deadly on occasion. Social media and even search engines have sent people deeper into cultlike spaces, where conspiracy theories and harmful rhetoric bounce off the walls, and driven more erratic members to commit senseless acts of violence.[^6] Even in more innocuous circumstances, social media can be perverted to sew distrust, to generate contempt and polarization, or to simply accelerate those processes. It still also manipulates our attention, which means we spend less time actually processing what we consume, going into the world to "touch grass," or working on our goals and relationships. These issues undermine the kind of community I want to cultivate and hamper attempts to understand the world through a critical lens, which is why social media and my relationship to it need to change in my LBI.

### Smaller communities can be tighter
A lot of people use social media because it connects us to a community, but large social media platforms don't really fill the role of actual communities. Just as we subdivide cities into neighborhoods and districts, social media platforms fragment into smaller pockets around certain interests or from particular backgrounds as they grow. My pockets on big-bucket sites like Facebook have strongly centered on other college students, aged 18-29, most of them also BIPOC or LGBTQ people whom I already know. Facebook hasn't grown my community much at all - it's simply been a medium for communicating with it. Without Facebook, I could just as easily visit most of these people offline.

On the other hand, I've had more community-enriching experiences while chatting on forums and IRC channels in the 2010's, having email penpals, making gaming buddies in smaller lobbies on massive multiplayer games, networking with strangers on low-traffic subreddits, and reading or commenting on personal websites. In all these places, I'd been able to grow my circle of friends and experience closeness with strangers in ways which are difficult to achieve through larger networks like Twitter. My engagement with others through these means requires more intention on my part, but my interactions have been overall better curated. Perhaps I owe that to smaller userbases and community leaders who are passionate, aren't overburdened by content, and respond more to community feedback. It's possible to build a more vibrant, intimate, and caring community on social media, when there's a more managable ratio of people and the leaders are in touch with the community. Either way, I've enjoyed those experiences, and I'd like for my LBI to consist of a large network of small spaces, rather than a small network of large spaces.

### Growing our own internet can be fun
When I was younger, I used tools like Myspace, Neopets, Webs (formerly Freewebs), and ProBoards to build highly customized digital spaces for myself. Having an environment which I had control over gave me a safe place on the internet for self-expression. They provided a creative outlet, but they also formed my first experiences in programming and in developing my own communities - even if no more than ten people ever saw my content. I still have nostalgia for those days, but there are also plenty of positive reasons for building your own services online.

Everyone who decides to grow their own services has different reasons why they do so.[^7] On a service you host, and perhaps pay for, you have ownership over your data. Nobody can sell the data on your personally owned services except for you, and nobody can delete your data or force you off the service. This runs in contrast to "free" platforms like Facebook, which actually sell your data and use it for advertising or marketing. Unlike corporate-owned platforms, someone who has their own service can make their own rules, and they can use it to build a community with other like-minded people. Likewise, your service doesn't have to be subject to deceitful algorithms or design choices, such as what I mentioned before. For these reasons, I also want to have my own space, host more of my own services, and include others' homegrown spaces in my LBI.

## My path to a littler internet
Littling the internet isn't a straightforward task. As it runs against the internet's current balance of power, the path to littling the internet naturally comes with its own set of obstacles. Nonetheless, I find worth in effort it would take to build my own LBI, despite not having a clear view of the finish line. To me, the principle of having more control over my internet use and interacting with it intentionally and conscientiously matter most. For this reason, I wanted to list commitments which I've made, or want to make, and tools I hope to employ towards approaching my idea of an LBI.

### Be less online
My first commitment to an LBI is all about being less online. For an electrical engineering student and a tech geek, that probably doesn't sound realistic, but my real intention is to be more intentional about my time on the internet. This doesn't mean to cut out entertainment but rather to cut out online habits which make it harder for me to have the experience I want. Towards that end, I want to:

* **Form healthier social media and browsing habits.** This would involve getting rid of social media presences which don't serve me well, or reducing my social media activity, to fight against social media addiction patterns. I've already done this, in part, by disabling any non-essential notifications or attention-grabbing features on the services I use. I also only refresh my email hourly, rather than every 5-15 minutes, and my phone automatically turns on Do Not Disturb during the nighttime. In the future, I hope to delete Facebook and Instagram completely.

* **Engage better when online.** I want to engage better when I'm online and use the internet to have more constructive conversations and interactions. This is something I don't often have a problem with anymore, but I notice this often in other people. I fought the compulsion to debate everything people said on the internet for a long time, but as I grew older and entered college, I slowly realized how draining it was and how it put me on edge constantly. They were never productive arguments either because I never completely listened to the other person. Learning how to engage people thoughtfully in dialogue rather than debate is an important, lifelong skill, and it goes a long way towards better internet use.

* **Spend time outside.** I've been more involved in my real-life community since 2018, and it has done wonders for helping my social media and internet consumption. Taking your eyes of the screen every now and then can be beneficial to your mental wellbeing, so I make efforts to keep my phone in my pocket or leave it face-down around others. I also find comfort in taking short walks, even just around my apartment, or eating lunch alone or with a friend to get fresh air and refresh my perspective on life.

### Use free software
My next LBI-related commitment is towards using free and open-source software to loosen corporate holds on the devices I use. This can be tricky to do without technical know-how, but it has gotten better in recent years. Proprietary, non-free software (that is, software which is protected under copyright and intellectual property law and cannot be freely edited or shared) restricts our freedom as users. Of course, not all software which exists needs to be free software necessarily, but I'd like to use more apps and programs on my computer and phone which I can take apart and understand. I also want to contribute to free software and develop software which is more accessible to the public overall. To make more progress on this, I'll:

* **Switch to Linux.** I've wanted to reduce my reliance on Microsoft and Windows for a long time, primarily becauase Windows licenses are expensive as is, but secondly because Linux is easier to customize, more transparent, and more community-driven. I trust Linux's broader community much more than I trust Microsoft, and I want an operating system for my computer which reflects my sensibilities to use with my LBI.

* **Get a different phone.** Although it isn't as pressing for me, I don't want to be stuck with iPhone. Apple has a strong hold on the consumer market and maintains it by having a closed ecosystem. The iPhone is proprietary in both hardware and software, and I have security concerns about using any cellphone which more than likely has a government-planted backdoor. I don't know what kind of phone I would get, but based on my previous point, I would probably choose a phone, with software based on Linux.

* **Create my own software.** I've learned a lot of programming languages in my lifetime - HTML, Java, JavaScript, C, C++, C#, Python, and F# to name a few - and there isn't any reason why I can't develop my own software to use with my devices. I want to learn more programming languages, so I can make software to run on and share with my LBI. Making your own apps and programs is a great way to have something which suits your exact needs and use cases, or to simply have a fun side-project.

### Grow my own services
Lastly, I want to commit to growing my own services, hand-in-hand with my previous two commitments. This commitment has already required more work - it's why I created this website - but it has high importance to building the LBI which I'm imagining. Having my own services will give me, my projects, and my community a better place to live on the internet and provide stability, control, privacy, and security unlike what I would have on corporate-controlled services. As part of this goal, I'm going to:

* **Build my own website.** I've already done most of the labor, the result of which is this website and the domain it's hosted on. In the future, I hope to extend the software which supports this website or create my own, but I plan to stick with what I have right now for a while.

* **Make better use of email.** Last year, I also made the switch to Proton, a privacy-minded suite of software, which includes an email and calendar service. Each of Proton's apps are open-source and use encryption to send and receive messages, which is one of the main reasons I like Proton. In any case, I'd like to make more use of my email for communication because of how flexible and accessible email already is. Practically everyone who uses the internet has an email, and it's still very popular as a means of sending messages.

* **Run my own services.** Part of my rough idea for my LBI is to host services on servers I own and operate, rather than rely on services belonging to larger entities. I hope one day to have my own personal Mastodon server (or something like it) and my own email and web servers as well to break away from the crowd, but at minimum, I strive to be on services where the userbase is smaller and the owners are more responsive.

## Where the wind blows

My concept of a Little Big Internet isn't a one-size-fits-all recommendation for how others should construct their own segment of online space; nonetheless, I encourage that others consider it as just one possibility for an internet which is more humanist and small-community-focused. In my particular case, I am simply following my principles and values to what I hope is a natural conclusion. The internet is a powerful tool that has the potential to bring people together and facilitate communication, and I seek to play my small part in creating a more equitable, sustainable internet through my personal LBI framework.

[^1]: Based on 2020 data from the World Bank, [Individuals using the Internet (% of population)](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS) and [Population, total](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL)

[^2]: https://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.html

[^3]: https://www.visualcapitalist.com/how-much-data-is-generated-each-day/

[^4]: https://hbr.org/2022/01/the-psychology-of-your-scrolling-addiction

[^5]: https://www.deceptive.design/

[^6]: https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/article/radical-ideas-social-media-algorithms/

[^7]: https://growyourown.services/why-growing-your-own-services-is-a-good-idea/